episodes/03-working-with-files-and-folders.md, before:

---
title: Working with files and directories
teaching: 20
exercises: 10
---

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Work with files and directories from the command line
- Use tab completion to limit typing
- Use commands to print and view files and parts of files
- Use commands to move/rename, copy, and delete files

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

- How can I copy, move, and delete files and directories?
- How can I read files?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Working with files and folders

As well as navigating directories, we can interact with files on the command line:
we can read them, open them, run them, and even edit them. In fact, there's really
no limit to what we *can* do in the shell, but even experienced shell users still switch to
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) for many tasks, such as editing formatted text
documents (Word or OpenOffice), browsing the web, editing images, etc. But if we
wanted to make the same crop on hundreds of images, say, the pages of a scanned book,
then we could automate that cropping work by using shell commands.

Before getting started, we will use `ls` to list the contents of our current directory. Using `ls` periodically to view your options is useful to orient oneself.

```bash
$ ls
```

```output
Applications Documents    Library      Music        Public
Desktop      Downloads    Movies       Pictures
```

We will try a few basic ways to interact with files. Let's first move into the
`shell-lesson` directory on your desktop.

```bash
$ cd
$ cd Desktop/shell-lesson
$ pwd
```

```output
/Users/riley/Desktop/shell-lesson
```

Here, we will create a new directory and move into it:

```bash
$ mkdir firstdir
$ cd firstdir
```

Here we used the `mkdir` command (meaning 'make directories') to create a directory
named 'firstdir'. Then we moved into that directory using the `cd` command.

But wait! There's a trick to make things a bit quicker. Let's go up one directory.

```bash
$ cd ..
```

Instead of typing `cd firstdir`, let's try to type `cd f` and then press the Tab key.
We notice that the shell completes the line to `cd firstdir/`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## Tab for Auto-complete

Pressing tab at any time within the shell will prompt it to attempt to auto-complete
the line based on the files or sub-directories in the current directory.
Where two or more files have the same characters, the auto-complete will only fill up to the
first point of difference, after which we can add more characters, and
try using tab again. We would encourage using this method throughout
today to see how it behaves (as it saves loads of time and effort!).

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Reading files

If you are in `firstdir`, use `cd ..` to get back to the `shell-lesson` directory.

Here there are copies of two public domain books downloaded from
[Project Gutenberg](https://www.gutenberg.org/) along with other files we will
cover later.

```bash
$ ls -lh
```

```output
total 33M
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff 383K Feb 22 2017  201403160_01_text.json
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 3.6M Jan 31 2017  2014-01-31_JA-africa.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 7.4M Jan 31 2017  2014-01-31_JA-america.tsv
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff 125M Jun 10 2015  2014-01_JA.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 1.4M Jan 31 2017  2014-02-02_JA-britain.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 582K Feb  2 2017  33504-0.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 598K Jan 31 2017  829-0.txt
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff  18K Feb 22 2017  diary.html
drwxr-xr-x 1 riley staff  64B Feb 22 2017  firstdir
```

The files `829-0.txt` and `33504-0.txt` holds the content of book #829
and #33504 on Project Gutenberg. But we've forgot *which* books, so
we try the `cat` command to read the text of the first file:

```bash
$ cat 829-0.txt
```

The terminal window erupts and the whole book cascades by (it is printed to
your terminal), leaving us with a new prompt and the last few lines of the book
above this prompt.

Often we just want a quick glimpse of the first or the last part of a file to
get an idea about what the file is about. To let us do that, the Unix shell
provides us with the commands `head` and `tail`.

```bash
$ head 829-0.txt
```

```output
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Gulliver's Travels, by Jonathan Swift


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
```

This provides a view of the first ten lines,
whereas `tail 829-0.txt` provides a perspective on the last ten lines:

```bash
$ tail 829-0.txt
```

```output
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
```

If ten lines is not enough (or too much), we would check `man head`(or `head --help` when using Windows)
to see if there exists an option to specify the number of lines to get
(there is: `head -n 20` will print 20 lines).

Another way to navigate files is to view the contents one screen at a time.
Type `less 829-0.txt` to see the first screen, `spacebar` to see the
next screen and so on, then `q` to quit (return to the command prompt).

```bash
$ less 829-0.txt
```

Like many other shell commands, the commands `cat`, `head`, `tail` and `less`
can take any number of arguments (they can work with any number of files).
We will see how we can get the first lines of several files at once.
To save some typing, we introduce a very useful trick first.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## Re-using commands

On a blank command prompt, press the up arrow key and notice that the previous
command you typed appears before your cursor. We can continue pressing the
up arrow to cycle through your previous commands. The down arrow cycles back
toward your most recent command. This is another important labour-saving
function and something we'll use a lot.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Press the up arrow until you get to the `head 829-0.txt` command. Add a space
and then `33504-0.txt` (Remember your friend Tab? Type `3` followed by Tab to
get `33504-0.txt`), to produce the following command:

```bash
$ head 829-0.txt 33504-0.txt
```

```output
==> 829-0.txt <==
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Gulliver's Travels, by Jonathan Swift


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org




==> 33504-0.txt <==
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Opticks, by Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Opticks
       or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections,
```

All good so far, but if we had *lots* of books, it would be tedious to enter
all the filenames. Luckily the shell supports wildcards! The `?` (matches exactly
one character) and `*` (matches zero or more characters) are probably familiar
from library search systems. We can use the `*` wildcard to write the above `head`
command in a more compact way:

```bash
$ head *.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## More on wildcards

Wildcards are a feature of the shell and will therefore work with *any* command.
The shell will expand wildcards to a list of files and/or directories before
the command is executed, and the command will never see the wildcards.
As an exception, if a wildcard expression does not match any file, Bash
will pass the expression as a parameter to the command as it is. For example
typing `ls *.pdf` results in an error message that there is no file called \*.pdf.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<!-- Timing: Spent 75 minutes to get here -->

### Moving, copying and deleting files

We may also want to change the file name to something more descriptive.
We can **move** it to a new name by using the `mv` or move command,
giving it the old name as the first argument and the new name as the second
argument:

```bash
$ mv 829-0.txt gulliver.txt
```

This is equivalent to the 'rename file' function.

Afterwards, when we perform a `ls` command, we will see that it is now called `gulliver.txt`:

```bash
$ ls
```

```output
2014-01-31_JA-africa.tsv   2014-02-02_JA-britain.tsv  gulliver.txt
2014-01-31_JA-america.tsv  33504-0.txt
2014-01_JA.tsv
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Copying a file

Instead of *moving* a file, you might want to *copy* a file (make a duplicate),
for instance to make a backup before modifying a file.
Just like the `mv` command, the `cp` command takes two arguments: the old name
and the new name. How would you make a copy of the file `gulliver.txt` called
`gulliver-backup.txt`? Try it!

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
cp gulliver.txt gulliver-backup.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Renaming a directory

Renaming a directory works in the same way as renaming a file. Try using the
`mv` command to rename the `firstdir` directory to `backup`.

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
mv firstdir backup
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Moving a file into a directory

If the last argument you give to the `mv` command is a directory, not a file,
the file given in the first argument will be moved to that directory. Try
using the `mv` command to move the file `gulliver-backup.txt` into the
`backup` folder.

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
mv gulliver-backup.txt backup
```

This would also work:

```bash
mv gulliver-backup.txt backup/gulliver-backup.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## The wildcards and regular expressions

The `?` wildcard matches one character. The `*` wildcard matches zero or
more characters. If you attended the lesson on regular expressions, do you
remember how you would express that as regular expressions?

(Regular expressions are not a feature of the shell, but some commands support
them. We'll get back to that.)

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

- The `?` wildcard matches the regular expression `.` (a dot)
- The `*` wildcard matches the regular expression `.*`

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Using `history`

Use the `history` command to see a list of all the commands you've entered during the
current session. You can also use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd> to do a reverse lookup. Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd>,
then start typing any part of the command you're looking for. The past command will
autocomplete. Press `enter` to run the command again, or press the arrow keys to start
editing the command. If multiple past commands contain the text you input, you can
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd> repeatedly to cycle through them. If you can't find what you're looking for
in the reverse lookup, use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>c</kbd> to return to the prompt. If you want to save
your history, maybe to extract some commands from which to build a script later on, you
can do that with `history > history.txt`. This will output all history to a text file
called `history.txt` that you can later edit. To recall a command from history, enter
`history`. Note the command number, e.g. 2045. Recall the command by entering
`!2045`. This will execute the command.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Using the `echo` command

The `echo` command simply prints out a text you specify. Try it out: `echo 'Library Carpentry is awesome!'`.
Interesting, isn't it?

You can also specify a variable. First type `NAME=` followed by your name, and press enter.
Then type `echo "$NAME is a fantastic library carpentry student"` and press enter. What happens?

You can combine both text and normal shell commands using `echo`, for example the
`pwd` command you have learned earlier today. You do this by enclosing a shell
command in `$(` and `)`, for instance `$(pwd)`. Now, try out the following:
`echo "Finally, it is nice and sunny on" $(date)`.
Note that the output of the `date` command is printed together with the text
you specified. You can try the same with some of the other commands you have learned so far.

**Why do you think the echo command is actually quite important in the shell environment?**

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

You may think there is not much value in such a basic command like `echo`. However, from the moment you
start writing automated shell scripts, it becomes very useful. For instance, you often need
to output text to the screen, such as the current status of a script.

Moreover, you just used a shell variable for the first time, which can be used to temporarily store information,
that you can reuse later on. It will give many opportunities from the moment you start writing automated scripts.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Finally, onto deleting. We won't use it now, but if you do want to delete a file,
for whatever reason, the command is `rm`, or remove.

Using wildcards, we can even delete lots of files. And adding the `-r` flag we
can delete folders with all their content.

**Unlike deleting from within our graphical user interface, there is *no* warning,
*no* recycling bin from which you can get the files back and no other undo options!**
For that reason, please be very careful with `rm` and extremely careful with `rm -r`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

- The shell can be used to copy, move, and combine multiple files

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Commit message:

Add caveat about tab completion to episode 3
- Not every shell's tab completion is the same. The existing description did not apply to my personal bash shell for example, which may confuse learners.
- Add caveat to let learners know that differing behaviour is expected in some cases.
- Wanted to suggest they review their settings later, but I think that makes the caveat too lengthy

episodes/03-working-with-files-and-folders.md, after:

---
title: Working with files and directories
teaching: 20
exercises: 10
---

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Work with files and directories from the command line
- Use tab completion to limit typing
- Use commands to print and view files and parts of files
- Use commands to move/rename, copy, and delete files

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

- How can I copy, move, and delete files and directories?
- How can I read files?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Working with files and folders

As well as navigating directories, we can interact with files on the command line:
we can read them, open them, run them, and even edit them. In fact, there's really
no limit to what we *can* do in the shell, but even experienced shell users still switch to
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) for many tasks, such as editing formatted text
documents (Word or OpenOffice), browsing the web, editing images, etc. But if we
wanted to make the same crop on hundreds of images, say, the pages of a scanned book,
then we could automate that cropping work by using shell commands.

Before getting started, we will use `ls` to list the contents of our current directory. Using `ls` periodically to view your options is useful to orient oneself.

```bash
$ ls
```

```output
Applications Documents    Library      Music        Public
Desktop      Downloads    Movies       Pictures
```

We will try a few basic ways to interact with files. Let's first move into the
`shell-lesson` directory on your desktop.

```bash
$ cd
$ cd Desktop/shell-lesson
$ pwd
```

```output
/Users/riley/Desktop/shell-lesson
```

Here, we will create a new directory and move into it:

```bash
$ mkdir firstdir
$ cd firstdir
```

Here we used the `mkdir` command (meaning 'make directories') to create a directory
named 'firstdir'. Then we moved into that directory using the `cd` command.

But wait! There's a trick to make things a bit quicker. Let's go up one directory.

```bash
$ cd ..
```

Instead of typing `cd firstdir`, let's try to type `cd f` and then press the Tab key.
We notice that the shell completes the line to `cd firstdir/`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## Tab for Auto-complete

Pressing tab at any time within the shell will prompt it to attempt to auto-complete
the line based on the files or sub-directories in the current directory.
Where two or more files have the same characters, the auto-complete will only fill up to the
first point of difference, after which we can add more characters, and
try using tab again. We would encourage using this method throughout
today to see how it behaves (as it saves loads of time and effort!).

Caveat: the exact behaviour of your shell's tab completion may differ slightly.
For example, when multiple files start with the same characters, you may actually find
that pressing tab does *not* fill up to the first point of difference. This could be
because you are using a [non-bash shell](https://scriptingosx.com/2019/07/moving-to-zsh-part-5-completions/), 
or even just because your bash settings are slightly different. It's best to 
stick with your current settings for now.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Reading files

If you are in `firstdir`, use `cd ..` to get back to the `shell-lesson` directory.

Here there are copies of two public domain books downloaded from
[Project Gutenberg](https://www.gutenberg.org/) along with other files we will
cover later.

```bash
$ ls -lh
```

```output
total 33M
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff 383K Feb 22 2017  201403160_01_text.json
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 3.6M Jan 31 2017  2014-01-31_JA-africa.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 7.4M Jan 31 2017  2014-01-31_JA-america.tsv
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff 125M Jun 10 2015  2014-01_JA.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 1.4M Jan 31 2017  2014-02-02_JA-britain.tsv
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 582K Feb  2 2017  33504-0.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 riley staff 598K Jan 31 2017  829-0.txt
-rw-rw-r-- 1 riley staff  18K Feb 22 2017  diary.html
drwxr-xr-x 1 riley staff  64B Feb 22 2017  firstdir
```

The files `829-0.txt` and `33504-0.txt` holds the content of book #829
and #33504 on Project Gutenberg. But we've forgot *which* books, so
we try the `cat` command to read the text of the first file:

```bash
$ cat 829-0.txt
```

The terminal window erupts and the whole book cascades by (it is printed to
your terminal), leaving us with a new prompt and the last few lines of the book
above this prompt.

Often we just want a quick glimpse of the first or the last part of a file to
get an idea about what the file is about. To let us do that, the Unix shell
provides us with the commands `head` and `tail`.

```bash
$ head 829-0.txt
```

```output
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Gulliver's Travels, by Jonathan Swift


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
```

This provides a view of the first ten lines,
whereas `tail 829-0.txt` provides a perspective on the last ten lines:

```bash
$ tail 829-0.txt
```

```output
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
```

If ten lines is not enough (or too much), we would check `man head`(or `head --help` when using Windows)
to see if there exists an option to specify the number of lines to get
(there is: `head -n 20` will print 20 lines).

Another way to navigate files is to view the contents one screen at a time.
Type `less 829-0.txt` to see the first screen, `spacebar` to see the
next screen and so on, then `q` to quit (return to the command prompt).

```bash
$ less 829-0.txt
```

Like many other shell commands, the commands `cat`, `head`, `tail` and `less`
can take any number of arguments (they can work with any number of files).
We will see how we can get the first lines of several files at once.
To save some typing, we introduce a very useful trick first.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## Re-using commands

On a blank command prompt, press the up arrow key and notice that the previous
command you typed appears before your cursor. We can continue pressing the
up arrow to cycle through your previous commands. The down arrow cycles back
toward your most recent command. This is another important labour-saving
function and something we'll use a lot.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Press the up arrow until you get to the `head 829-0.txt` command. Add a space
and then `33504-0.txt` (Remember your friend Tab? Type `3` followed by Tab to
get `33504-0.txt`), to produce the following command:

```bash
$ head 829-0.txt 33504-0.txt
```

```output
==> 829-0.txt <==
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Gulliver's Travels, by Jonathan Swift


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org




==> 33504-0.txt <==
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Opticks, by Isaac Newton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Opticks
       or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections,
```

All good so far, but if we had *lots* of books, it would be tedious to enter
all the filenames. Luckily the shell supports wildcards! The `?` (matches exactly
one character) and `*` (matches zero or more characters) are probably familiar
from library search systems. We can use the `*` wildcard to write the above `head`
command in a more compact way:

```bash
$ head *.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout

## More on wildcards

Wildcards are a feature of the shell and will therefore work with *any* command.
The shell will expand wildcards to a list of files and/or directories before
the command is executed, and the command will never see the wildcards.
As an exception, if a wildcard expression does not match any file, Bash
will pass the expression as a parameter to the command as it is. For example
typing `ls *.pdf` results in an error message that there is no file called \*.pdf.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<!-- Timing: Spent 75 minutes to get here -->

### Moving, copying and deleting files

We may also want to change the file name to something more descriptive.
We can **move** it to a new name by using the `mv` or move command,
giving it the old name as the first argument and the new name as the second
argument:

```bash
$ mv 829-0.txt gulliver.txt
```

This is equivalent to the 'rename file' function.

Afterwards, when we perform a `ls` command, we will see that it is now called `gulliver.txt`:

```bash
$ ls
```

```output
2014-01-31_JA-africa.tsv   2014-02-02_JA-britain.tsv  gulliver.txt
2014-01-31_JA-america.tsv  33504-0.txt
2014-01_JA.tsv
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Copying a file

Instead of *moving* a file, you might want to *copy* a file (make a duplicate),
for instance to make a backup before modifying a file.
Just like the `mv` command, the `cp` command takes two arguments: the old name
and the new name. How would you make a copy of the file `gulliver.txt` called
`gulliver-backup.txt`? Try it!

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
cp gulliver.txt gulliver-backup.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Renaming a directory

Renaming a directory works in the same way as renaming a file. Try using the
`mv` command to rename the `firstdir` directory to `backup`.

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
mv firstdir backup
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Moving a file into a directory

If the last argument you give to the `mv` command is a directory, not a file,
the file given in the first argument will be moved to that directory. Try
using the `mv` command to move the file `gulliver-backup.txt` into the
`backup` folder.

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

```bash
mv gulliver-backup.txt backup
```

This would also work:

```bash
mv gulliver-backup.txt backup/gulliver-backup.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## The wildcards and regular expressions

The `?` wildcard matches one character. The `*` wildcard matches zero or
more characters. If you attended the lesson on regular expressions, do you
remember how you would express that as regular expressions?

(Regular expressions are not a feature of the shell, but some commands support
them. We'll get back to that.)

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

- The `?` wildcard matches the regular expression `.` (a dot)
- The `*` wildcard matches the regular expression `.*`

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Using `history`

Use the `history` command to see a list of all the commands you've entered during the
current session. You can also use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd> to do a reverse lookup. Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd>,
then start typing any part of the command you're looking for. The past command will
autocomplete. Press `enter` to run the command again, or press the arrow keys to start
editing the command. If multiple past commands contain the text you input, you can
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>r</kbd> repeatedly to cycle through them. If you can't find what you're looking for
in the reverse lookup, use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>c</kbd> to return to the prompt. If you want to save
your history, maybe to extract some commands from which to build a script later on, you
can do that with `history > history.txt`. This will output all history to a text file
called `history.txt` that you can later edit. To recall a command from history, enter
`history`. Note the command number, e.g. 2045. Recall the command by entering
`!2045`. This will execute the command.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Using the `echo` command

The `echo` command simply prints out a text you specify. Try it out: `echo 'Library Carpentry is awesome!'`.
Interesting, isn't it?

You can also specify a variable. First type `NAME=` followed by your name, and press enter.
Then type `echo "$NAME is a fantastic library carpentry student"` and press enter. What happens?

You can combine both text and normal shell commands using `echo`, for example the
`pwd` command you have learned earlier today. You do this by enclosing a shell
command in `$(` and `)`, for instance `$(pwd)`. Now, try out the following:
`echo "Finally, it is nice and sunny on" $(date)`.
Note that the output of the `date` command is printed together with the text
you specified. You can try the same with some of the other commands you have learned so far.

**Why do you think the echo command is actually quite important in the shell environment?**

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Answer

You may think there is not much value in such a basic command like `echo`. However, from the moment you
start writing automated shell scripts, it becomes very useful. For instance, you often need
to output text to the screen, such as the current status of a script.

Moreover, you just used a shell variable for the first time, which can be used to temporarily store information,
that you can reuse later on. It will give many opportunities from the moment you start writing automated scripts.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Finally, onto deleting. We won't use it now, but if you do want to delete a file,
for whatever reason, the command is `rm`, or remove.

Using wildcards, we can even delete lots of files. And adding the `-r` flag we
can delete folders with all their content.

**Unlike deleting from within our graphical user interface, there is *no* warning,
*no* recycling bin from which you can get the files back and no other undo options!**
For that reason, please be very careful with `rm` and extremely careful with `rm -r`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

- The shell can be used to copy, move, and combine multiple files

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
